SmithBarney presents Explorer.
December 26, 2004, Banda Aceh,
Sumatra, a massive earthquake
hammers the city.
An amateur photographer sets out
to record the destruction.
But an even worse catastrophe
speeds his way.
A wall of devastation hurdling
across the ocean at up for 500
miles per house.
The cameraman races
for his life.
But in Banda Aceh, it's
too late to run.
Tsunamis, hurricanes,
earthquakes, volcanoes, is our
planet getting more violent?
What can we do about it?
2004 will go down as one of the
deadliest years ever for
natural disasters, the worst
hurricane season in memory,
massive earthquakes, and, of
course, the devastating
tsunami that struck
12 countries.
They all raise an urgent
question, are we entering a
dangerous cycle that could
cause catastrophes on an
unprecedented scale.
And if so, what can we do to
survive our violent earth?
Banda Aceh at ground zero.
A cameraman films
an earthquake.
But the Tsunami that follows
it catches it by surprise.
He can't outrun the
killer waves.
And now he's fighting
for his life.
Even underwater, he never
lets go of his camera,
and climbs to safety.
Over 270,000 wouldn't
be so lucky.
Because the world was in the
grip of the worst natural
disaster in decades.
Walls of water up to 100 feet
high sweeping across the
Indian Ocean in all
directions and
slamming into 12 countries.
A tsunami that sends families,
villages, entire towns to
their graves.
The massive quake that spawned
it is so powerful, it lifts
the earth's crust and moves the
island of Sumatra over 60
feet, so powerful, it actually
causes the earth to wobble on
its axis, slowing its
revolution, and shortening
that fateful day by almost
three microseconds.
The 2004 tsunami is
a mega disaster
that came out of nowhere.
Or did it?
The earth appears to
be getting more
deadly than ever before.
We know that there are many
cases where the worse has not
yet been seen.
Are natural disasters
becoming more
frequently and more deadly?
To find out, we'll explore one
of the the century's most
destructive event and examined
three critical cities where
earthquakes, volcanoes, and
hurricanes are poised to
strike death blows against
helpless populations.
Can we avoid the outbursts
of out violent planet?
Or are we like this man on a
beach in Thailand, helpless in
the path of mother
nature's fury.
This suburb of Banda Aceh in
Northern Sumatra just before
the tsunami, and after.
One bridge survived the ocean's
onslaught barely.
Yesterday 30,000 Sumatrans lived
in sight of this bridge.
But the oceans upheaval killed
nine out of ten people here.
Yulianto and his son Rito
miraculously beat the odds.
We don't have anything anymore
now except what
we have on our bodies.
2004's disaster robbed Yulianto
and Rito of more than
their possessions.
Father and son scour refugee
camps in search of Rito's two
sisters and his mother.
I feel that since I was saved,
than maybe my mother's out
there somewhere.
We're looking for everyone.
It's been a century since
the major tsunami had
hit northern Sumatra.
But the islanders fear they
haven't seen the worst. The
monster that terrifies
them came from a
commonplace force of nature.
About a dozen tectonic plates
make up the earth's crust.
Floating on a sea of magma,
these massive slabs constantly
jostle each other.
Just off the coast of Sumatra,
a fault line where the India
plate and the Burma
plate meet.
As one subducted the other,
it released a
tremendous amount of energy.
This is a thrust fault.
And it created the
killer quake.
And because it happened under
water, it displaced a massive
volume of ocean, breeding the
quake's deadly twin, tsunami.
The quake was among the most
devastating in history
measuring up to 9.3 on
the Richter scale.
It exploded with the force
of more than 36,000
Hiroshima-sized atomic bombs.
Its staggering size makes
scientists worry about the
future of our planet.
Geologist John Ebel desperately
scours seismic
records to find out.
Could more be coming?
This is really one of the most
profound earthquakes we've
seen so far on planet earth.
From 1946 to 1964 we had several
earthquakes of this
size take place over a
very short time span.
Then we go 40 years after 1964,
nothing this large on
the earth until 2004.
Risking aftershocks and disease,
scientists take stock
of just how large it was.
Every time I turn the corner,
it's just something else just
blows my mind.
Here's a boat on
top of a pickup
truck wedged in a building.
Think of the force it must
take to bend a truck bed.
Tsunami scientist, Jose Borrero,
using surveying tools
and GPS mapping to quantify
the tsunami's
power at maximum impact.
An analysis of the wave's
construction could offer ways
to protect people from
the next one.
And on a planet that seems every
more violent, the next
one is almost guaranteed.
Already Borrero reaches a
conclusion that should send
chills to coastal city
dwellers everywhere.
Living in a city actually makes
people more vulnerable
to this disaster
than elsewhere.
If you're say, in a coconut
grove or something, and
there's a tsunami coming, the
water is going to spread out.
But here, you don't have much
chance of escaping.
Escape, almost impossible.
The surging water tore through
town gathering cars, truck,
and building debris into a
raging wall of destruction.
As people scrambled for safety,
the town's buildings
channelled the unstoppable
juggernaut into narrow streets
where it bulldozed everything
in its path.
Its speed increased and
the reach of death
climbed ever higher.
The difference between life
and death was literally
measured in inches.
If you were here, you
would have lived.
I you were here, you
would have died.
Death may be planning another
visit to Sumatra.
One geologist estimates that
only a fraction of this fault,
just 6% of its total length
caused the killer quake.
That leaves 94%, some 2,400
miles of the fault line
apparently dormant.
There's more.
This quake may spawn a
future killer quake
somewhere else in the world.
A new theory suggests
earthquakes are caused by a
global chain reaction.
And Sumatra's hammer blow may,
itself, have been triggered by
and earthquake a year earlier
and half a world away.
December 26, 2003, exactly one
year before Banda Aceh's
killer wave, a massive
earthquake flattened the city
of Bam, Iran, taking
some 26,000 lives.
Bam is about 3,000 miles
from Sumatra.
The two disasters may be part
of a deadly chain reaction.
Our planets fault lines may
act like a spider's web.
Moving one thread could affect
others with deadly results.
If these plates are all part
of one vast interconnected
system, then a movement in a
plate on one side of the world
will cause jostling on the other
side of the world so why
shouldn't the collision of two
plates in Iran produce a
series of shock waves and
judders which eventually, a
year later, caused the Indian
plate to subduct below the
Burma plate, which is what
happened off Banda Aceh.
If the theory was true, the
Banda Aceh plate could set off
another somewhere else
in the world.
Many major cities are near fault
lines, San Francisco,
Mexico City, Taipei,
Tokyo, Los Angeles.
But if one city is poised to
suffer one of history's worst
natural disasters, it
is Istanbul, Turkey.
A North Anatolian fault line,
the junction two tectonic
plates has been coughing up
major quakes with stunning
frequency in the last
half-century.
Like cascading dominoes,
the quakes are
bearing down on Istanbul.
The death toll caused by
a quake here would be
staggering.
This home to ten million is the
front line for examining
our violent earth.
Hundreds of thousands
could die.
Why so many?
Each year, 250,000 new people
crowd into Istanbul and its
surrounding suburbs.
For years apartment buildings
sprang up to house the influx.
Most were made of shoddy
materials and thrown together
at a reckless pace.
They're unable to fend off the
slightest tremor, like the
village that was hit when the
last domino fell, just 65
miles from Istanbul.
August, 1999, a quake measuring
7.4 on the Richter
scale strikes the neighborhood
Arzu Demir calls home.
It's 3:02 in the morning when
her world explodes.
At first I could not understand
what happened.
I heard my mom and
dad's voices.
I said don't come
into the room.
Get out.
Save yourself.
They didn't listen.
The quake thunders
for 45 seconds.
Demir's poorly constructed
apartment building doesn't
stand a chance.
Within seconds, the top
three floors collapse.
She and her siblings
should be dead.
But somehow they fall into a
pocket in the rubble just big
enough to hold them.
Demir is severely injured.
Her time is running out.
For hours rescue workers grapple
with debris and slabs
of concrete looking for any
signs of survivors.
I was in immense pain,
endless pain.
I started to hear voices.
Her parents are among the
more 17,000 killed.
But Demir and her siblings
survive.
Had this quake struck Istanbul,
an estimated 35,000
buildings would have
been destroyed.
For Demir, an unspeakable
ordeal.
But the truth is, violent
eruptions actually stabilize
our planet.
Earthquakes act as release
valves for pressure building
deep in t he planets core.
Without them, the pressure would
build until the earth's
crust could no longer contain
it, resulting in an apocalypse
obliterating life on earth.
How can we learn to live with
these terrifying events?
One idea is to diffuse the
power of big quakes by
creating small, man-made ones.
A machine already exists
to do just that.
It born at the height
of the Cold War.
A Soviet-made earth
quake machine.
Designed as a new energy source,
it yielded as much
power as a small nuclear
reactor.
Seismologists harnessed that
power to measure the earth's
crust. A rocket engine shot a
burst of energy through an
electromagnetic field 30
miles straight down.
In affect, Soviet scientists
were shooting lightning bolts
into the earth, yet they
were surprised by
what happened next.
The earth shot back
with earth quakes.
By creating small quakes, the
machine could relieve pressure
building under the earth's
crust. This might avert the
kind of mega quake bearing
down on Istanbul.
But if the quake maker were
positioned over a fault, no
one knows what it would do,
the fear, a catastrophic
seismic event, an unstoppable
chain reaction of earthquakes
and tsunamis around the globe.
Experimentation with mother
nature is a very, very
difficult thing that we
have to be careful of.
We might actually trigger a
bigger earthquake then the one
we were trying to prevent.
The US military bought the quake
machines Cold War ended.
Where is it today?
Unknown.
But the quake machine
isn't our only hope.
For decades, hydrologists have
observed that when wells are
dug deep into the earth, they
can generate small tremors.
This happens because water can
push minor faults apart
causing the plates to slide.
The theory is the same as with
the quake machines, more small
quakes instead of a big one.
But like the quake machine,
the issue is control.
Inducing quakes is an
inexact science.
Once you begin using water to
create tremors, you might
instead release a killer
quake, like the one
threatening Istanbul.
Seismic engineer, Mustafa
Erdik isn't counting on
dubious intervention
to save his city.
He's seeking real
solutions today.
Because it's not a question
of if, but when.
The chances of having a large
earthquake in this city in the
next 30 years are about 65%.
So my feelings tell me that
it's pretty much due.
His secret weapon in quake
prediction is a former church
turned mosque called
Hagia Sophia.
It's a sacred site by day, A
high tech early warning system
around the clock.
Erdik has crammed the mosque
with monitors that transmit
data to sensors on his
hilltop laboratory.
The mosque and more than 50
other locations across the
city act as ears on the
ground alerting him to
any signs of tremors.
At the first hint of a quake,
the system automatically shuts
down major industrial plants
to avoid leaks
of dangerous materials.
At the same time, it sends
emergency response teams a map
that identifies hardest
hit areas.
At most, the system will
diminish the damage, not
eliminate it.
But these efforts could save
thousands of lives.
However, there's a bigger
problem affecting not just
Istanbul, but everything city
on a major fault line.
The earth is prone to periods of
increased seismic activity.
And we might be entering
one such phase.
The most recent quakes could
be just the beginning.
Meanwhile, we're compounding
the danger.
Like Istanbul citizens, people
all of the world aren't moving
out of danger zones, they're
moving into them.
And earthquakes aren't the most
explosive disasters our
violent earth can throw at us.
Natural disaster dominate
our headlines.
As body counts soar, we feel
like unwelcome guests on an
increasingly hostile planet.
And nowhere is the peril
more apparent than in
the shadow of a volcano.
The earth is home to some
600 active volcanoes.
Half a billion live within
their blast range.
Some are known killers,
Montserrat in the Caribbean.
The 1997 eruption buried the
nation's capital in ash.
Mount Pinatubo in
the Philippines.
Its 1991 blast was ten times the
size of Mount St. Helens.
Active volcanoes can
appear dormant.
But many are, in fact,
ticking time bombs.
Naples, Italy, the uneasy
neighbor of a seismic serial
killer, making it one
city most likely to
suffer a fiery death.
Here 600,000 people live
within the red zone.
That's the blast range of what's
undoubtedly the world'd
most treacherous volcano.
Vesuvius, a killer with a rap
sheet of a mile long.
Its historic eruption in 79 AD
entombed two entire cities,
Pompeii and Herculaneum, each
about as close to Vesuvius as
downtown Naples.
Their victims are haunting
reminders of an ancient
disaster, and a warning
to Neapolitans today.
While most of the world knows
the story of Pompeii, few
realized just how often
Vesuvius erupts.
The last time was a little
more than a half a
century ago in 1944.
The Allied forces had invaded
Italy and were driving north.
A few tremors from a quiet
volcano was the last on
Neapolitans mind.
For more than a week, pumice,
volcanic gases, and searing
hot ash shot out.
Rivers of lava poured down
the mountainside.
We had the sensation that our
life could come to an end in
the most horrible way.
The 1944 eruption killed
26 Neapolitans.
The city got off easy, which is
perhaps why its lesson was
seemingly ignored.
Because from 1944 to 2004,
those living in Vesuvius'
shadow grew to 600,000.
And all the while, the mass
murderer has been building
toward disaster.
The city is so concerned,
they're actually paying people
to leave. City official Marco Di
Lello pleads with families
to move out of the red zone,
the area most likely to be
devastated by the
next eruption.
The Morano family is considering
Di Lello's plea.
In exchange for a payment of
around $35,000, they would
abandon their home
of many years.
If they do, that's one down
and thousands to go.
But why haven't the Moranos and
others like them left the
red zone already?
Vesuvius, like other volcanoes
that go long periods between
eruptions, holds a deadly
attraction.
Mineral rich volcanic soil
creates an inviting paradise
on the outside.
Beneath, murder brews
in its molten heart.
Like earthquakes, most active
volcanoes are born from the
rubbing of tectonic plates,
which brings up magma from
deep in the earth.
Some volcanoes in the middle of
plates aren't at volatile.
They continuously spew
lava relieving
the underground pressure.
Volcanoes on faults, like
Vesuvius, build magma and
pressure for years until they
erupt with explosive force, a
force of nature that's
impossible to stop.
It would happened like this,
first excessive gas leaks,
bulges, and swelling.
Then things get shaky.
It's times to run.
Because after those tremors,
ghostly silence followed by
detonation.
By studying these signs,
scientists can predict when
volcanoes will erupt.
And few volcanoes are as closely
monitored as Vesuvius.
I think it's the most dangerous
volcano in the world
Because there is no way to save
the people without the
complete evacuation
of the area.
Volcanologist Giuseppe
Mastrolorenzo keeps a close
watch on Vesuvius' gases
and temperature.
Today the monster
sleeps quietly.
When Mastrolorenzo detects
tell-tale signs, he can give
Naples a full month's warning.
What he can't do is force
Neopolitan's to flea.
One family already has.
Back at the Morano household,
they've decided to get out
while the getting is good.
At least with volcanoes, you
can leave ground zero.
But what about when the
disaster comes to you.
Another of our planet's furies
literally arises from thin air
and delivers savage destruction
with lightning speed.
But even if hurricanes are the
most elusive natural disaster,
they may offer the best chance
we have of actual
intervention.
Small changes can really have
a big effect on the weather.
Can we stop one of these
killers in its tracks?
1992's Hurricane Andrew, with
gusts up to 165 miles per
hour, this category 5 terror,
was the most destructive
United States hurricane
on record.
One like it might be
headed your way.
Because if you live anywhere
along to the hurricane belt
that straddles our planet, your
ocean view might change
into a monster like this.
Hurricanes are incredibly
powerful.
A single major hurricane is
expending more power, more
energy, than all the electric
utilities on
earth combined together.
2004 was the most active
hurricane season in
more than 50 years.
It's part of a spike in
hurricane activity that began
in the 1990s and could
last for decades.
And few cities in the world
stand to suffer more from just
one major blow than
New Orleans.
This party town dodges
storms every year.
But its Achilles' heal is a
densely populated region that
lies below sea level.
Locals call it The Bowl.
When a big storm does strike
the Big Easy, it'll likely
fill The Bowl, taking
some 50,000 lives.
What we're talking about,
in this case, is tens of
thousands of casualties, deaths,
and affecting an area
that would be 30 or
40 square miles.
Every hurricane season a
nightmare reappears.
September, 2004, Hurricane Ivan
churns through the Gulf
of Mexico gathering strength.
Near landfall it's a category 5
storm with winds topping out
at 160 miles per hour.
As Ivan's track swerves works
unpredictably, the visions
begin, visions of a storm surge
blowing through Bourbon
Street, of houses, buildings,
bursting apart in the wind,
and most frightening of all,
visions of a city drowning.
As Ivan approaches, 600,000
people heed the warnings and
evacuate New Orleans.
But Hurricane Ivan ends up
veering east and striking the
Florida panhandle.
It kills dozens and causes
billions in damages.
It's a terrible tragedy
for Florida.
But New Orleans survived
its annual
game of Russian roulette.
The city knows its
time will come.
But scientists are desperate
to find out when.
The records only go
back 150 years.
And not a single major storm
has hit New Orleans.
So accurately predicting how
often they strike has been
impossible, until today.
Louisiana State University
scientist Kam-Biu Liu believes
the answer lies buried
in the mud.
Liu is the founding father
of a field called
paleotempestology, the study of
historic weather patterns.
When a major hurricane strikes,
the storm surge
creates the layer of sediment.
Analyzing samples of mud should
show how often New
Orleans has been hit.
Today Liu is pulling core
samples from some nine feet
down near New Orleans.
That nine feet gives Liu a
picture 5,000 years into the
past.
We must know the past before
we can predict
or forecast a future.
You may say the $30 billion
question is how often does a
city like New Orleans get hit
by a category 5 hurricane.
Back in the lab, Liu splits
the core in half.
The tell-tale sediment of a
major hurricane turns up about
every 30 inches or 300 years.
Until we got to this part, and
the most distinct layers are
this and that.
And this is a thicker one.
You see how sharp
the counter is?
And this is definitely
an event.
The spacing of events tells Dr.
Liu New Orleans is living
on borrowed time.
A major hurricane
is way overdue.
New Orleans, so far, has
been very lucky.
Because it kind of dodged
a bullet during
the last 100 years.
So even though New
Orleans has been
lucky, we must be prepared.
They city is not entirely
defenseless.
Over the last century, the Army
Corps of Engineers has
built a system of levees
15 to 20 feet time.
That might stop a flood
caused by a
category 2 or 3 hurricane.
But a big one would send waters
over the barrier.
Coastal engineer, Joe Suhayda
knows New Orleans' nightmare
is measured in feet.
This is to protect
from a category 3
or category 2 storm.
But in the worst case scenario,
the actual water
level would be up around
the top of my head.
So it would be about six
feet or so above
the top of this levee.
Residents here call the
nightmare scenario "filling
The Bowl." A storm surge bursts
over the levees and has
no where to go.
The city becomes a lake.
It's flood waters are rendered
toxic by sewage and chemical
waste and infested
with disease.
Cleanup all buy impossible.
Joe Suhayda wants to go to
extremes to prevent that
apocalypse.
He proposes building a massive
new wall to shield The Bowl.
But there may be another way,
by tackling the storm before
it gets here.
One of the most destructive
disasters, hurricanes alone
may be tamed.
We have ways to change the
atmosphere in a way that other
earth scientists just wouldn't
be able to do.
Atmospheric scientists, Ross
Hoffman, has done the
impossible.
He's changed a hurricane's path,
and even slowed them
down, at least on a computer.
He's shown that even minor
changes in the conditions
surrounding a hurricane can
dramatically change the
storm's behavior.
In an attempt to reduce the
winds by seeding the clouds
near the center of the storm
with silver iodide crystals.
But he's not the first
in a frantic
quest to tame the monster.
In the 1960s, the US embarked
on an ambitious experiment
called Project Stormfury.
The team tried dropping
chemicals into the wind
currents just outside the
hurricane's fast-moving eye
wall, hoping to slow down
its strongest winds.
But results?
Disappointing.
The bold initiative never
succeeded in weakening
hurricanes.
Project Stormfury was canned.
Today other scientists want to
try a different approach, one
that attacks a hurricane's
moisture supply.
We know that hurricanes get
their main source of energies
at the ocean's surface.
Hurricanes live on two things,
water and heat.
Dry up the water in hurricanes'
clouds, and
theoretically, it evaporates.
A team out of Florida is
experimenting with a gel that
absorbs more than 3,000 times
its mass in moisture.
The trouble is to deploy enough
gel, you'd have to fly
almost 400 supertanker aircrafts
into the hurricane
about every 90 minutes,
a costly
solution years from reality.
Yet even if we had a proven
strategy to eliminate
hurricanes, we might
have second
thoughts about using it.
Hurricanes provide enormous
environmental benefits by
redistributing heat
in the atmosphere.
If we like the earth the way
it is now, then we have two
accept some of the
side effects.
And hurricanes are one
of those things.
Accepting the mortal danger of
hurricanes and other natural
disasters may be a bitter
pill to swallow.
As we've seen, human plans to
avert mega disasters are
futuristic, even foolhardy.
How vulnerable are we on a
planet that seems to be
getting more violent,
more deadly, more
hostile every year?
Sometimes it's hard to escape
the fear that we're living on
an ever more violent planet.
Just three months after 2004's
mega disaster, Banda Aceh's
worst nightmare comes true.
Another major quake explodes off
the coast. Shock waves are
felt around the world.
Hardened by 2004's catastrophe,
victims in Banda
Aceh await a new killer tsunami
that never comes.
Why?
One theory, this quake occurred
in shallower waters.
Less water displaced means
a tragedy averted.
But did this new quake confirm
fears of an endless chain
reaction of quakes?
Banda Aceh still reels from
December's punishing wave. And
with the latest quake, new proof
of a planet seemingly
out of control.
This woman last saw her family
shopping on this street.
One of these buildings
holds their bodies.
She cannot rest until they do.
And we cannot escape the
fear that we could
share a similar fate.
Some scientists predict another
mega tsunami could
come from an entirely different
source, not a quake,
but a volcano.
This huge volcano is part of
the Canary Islands in the
Eastern Atlantic.
It's known as Cumbre Vieja.
And geologists fear that if it
erupts, some of its wake could
crash into the sea, generating
a tsunami so big it could
strike Northern Africa, Western
Europe, and even the
Eastern seaboard of
the United States.
Scenarios like this make
us feel the earth is
getting more violent.
Here are the facts.
Volcanoes, up to 60
erupt every year.
And with more people moving into
red zones, the death toll
is sure to rise.
Earthquakes, the planet
does suffer periods of
more intense activity.
Are we in one now?
Too soon to know.
But the signs are disturbing.
Hurricanes, they've been on the
rise since the mid-1990s.
And they could be getting
more powerful.
Some believe global warming
provides more fuel for
hurricanes.
That's bad news for cities
like New Orleans.
But the increase in storms may
just be part of a normal
atmospheric cycle.
This is the earth simply showing
that it's a living
entity and it's flexing its
muscles, it's breathing, it's
creating and recreating.
It would have to destroy some of
itself in order to recreate
more of itself.
There are six times more fatal
disasters reported today than
in the 1960s.
But the violent earth
is not to blame.
The real cause, around half
the world's people live in
danger zones prone to inevitable
earth catastrophes.
Most of these places are in
poorer countries, soaring
populations, poor building
quality.
And the absence of warning
systems mean rising death
tolls are a certainty.
For rich and poor, our best
options are improving
prediction and getting
out of harm's way.
Near volcanoes, in earthquake
zones, on coastlines
vulnerable to hurricanes
and tsunamis.
We live on the edge.
And we occasionally pay the
price for doing so.
Because what makes places
beautiful are the forces that,
from time to time,
destroy them.
Destruction will always
be a part of earth's
rejuvenating processes.
But for many of us, it's our
choice whether we'll stand in
the path of disaster.